ince the 1990s, welfare reform has placed increasing emphasis on the “activation” of recipients. This
has come with a growing load of obligations and responsibilities for recipients, requiring them to prove
their deservingness to receive welfare benefits. What feedback does this have on the welfare attitudes
of target populations? I draw on qualitative interviews with Austrian and German labor market and
pension policy recipients, showing there is a general tendency to internalize deservingness criteria and
to “mirror” them onto others. This mechanism, however, can work in different directions. Where
recipients lack the capacity to meet access criteria, this leads to experiences of misrecognition and
social exclusion. Many react to these by pointing their finger at less deserving welfare recipient groups,
arguing that based on the criteria proposed by the policy norm, those rather than themselves should
be excluded from public solidarity provision. This results in a dynamic of “kicking down” along the “rank
order” of deservingness (van Oorschot 2000), typically ending with blaming of immigrants (welfare
chauvinism). On the contrary, I find some evidence that where social investment policies provide active
resources that raise recipients’ capacity, enabling them to socially participate, this comes with
experiences of recognition and social inclusion. In reaction, there is a tendency to argue that “others
should be provided the same opportunity”, even if they have a lower standing in the rank order of
deservingness. These findings contribute to the literature on welfare reform and policy feedback


--------
Mature welfare states must increasingly handle growing fiscal pressures and a multitude of needs
with smaller resources. Meanwhile, evaluations of policy outputs are characterized as ‘the weakest
link’ in welfare state support, resulting in generalized political distrust. We assess the procedural
fairness argument that citizens are not only concerned with welfare state outcomes but also
assess the fairness of the processes of service delivery. The fairness perspective has usually been
tested in cross-sectional studies, experiments or on the ‘input side’ of democracy. By contrast, we
use primary three-wave panel data on evaluations and experiences with welfare state institutions.
The random-effects within-between framework allows improved causal evidence that both
outputs (service quality satisfaction) and procedural fairness (experienced voice opportunities)
affect political trust. Crucially, however, perceived fairness mitigates detrimental effects of poor
outcomes. This is because procedural voice matters, especially for the formation of political trust
among losers.


-----
Does becoming poorer always cause people to shift their attitudes towards higher demand for
redistribution? Through a systematic review of the literature on this question, we reveal five
important themes in existing research: a person’s current income, their future expectations, their
expectations about redistribution benefits, their income in early life and their attitudes towards
beneficiaries. Identifying these themes helps explain why responses to economic hardship are
variable and heterogeneous, and can very usefully guide future research.


Support for populist radical right parties in Europe has dramatically increased in recent
years.
We decompose the rise of these parties from 2005 to 2020 into four compo-
nents: shifts in party positions, changes in voter attributes (opinions and demograph-
ics), changes in voter priorities, and a residual. We merge two wide datasets on party
positions and voter attributes and estimate voter priorities using a probabilistic voting
model. We find that shifts in party positions and changes in voter attributes do not
play a major role in the recent success of populist radical right parties. Instead, the
primary driver behind their electoral success lies in voters’ changing priorities. Particu-
larly, voters are less likely to decide which party to support based on parties’ economic
positions. Rather, voters—mainly older, nonunionized, low-educated men—increasingly
prioritize nativist cultural positions. This allows populist radical right parties to tap
into a preexisting reservoir of culturally conservative voters. Using the same datasets,
we provide a set of reduced-form evidence supporting our results. First, while parties’
positions have changed, these changes are not consistent with the main supply-side hy-
potheses for populist support. Second, on aggregate, voters have not adopted populist
right-wing opinions. Third, voters are more likely to self-identify ideologically based on
their cultural rather than their economic opinions.


-----


ABSTRACT
Labor-saving technology has already decreased employment oppor-
tunities for middle-skill workers. Experts anticipate that advances
in AI and robotics will cause even more significant disruptions in
the labor market over the next two decades. This paper presents
three experimental studies that investigate how this profound eco-
nomic change could affect mass politics. Recent observational stud-
ies suggest that workers’ exposure to automation risk predicts their
support not only for redistribution but also for right-wing populist
policies and candidates. Other observational studies, including my
own, find that workers underestimate the impact of automation
on their job security. Misdirected blame towards immigrants and
workers in foreign countries, rather than concerns about workplace
automation, could be driving support for right-wing populism. To
correct American workers’ beliefs about the threats to their jobs,
I conducted three survey experiments in which I informed work-
ers about the existent and future impact of workplace automation.
While these informational treatments convinced workers that au-
tomation threatens American jobs, they failed to change respon-
dents’ preferences on welfare, immigration, and trade policies. My
research finds that raising awareness about workplace automation
did not decrease opposition to globalization or increase support for
policies that will prepare workers for future technological disrup-
tions.


----
Abstract
This article investigates the political consequences of occupational change in
times of rapid technological advancement and sheds light on the economic
and cultural roots of right-wing populism. A growing body of research shows
that the disadvantages of a transforming employment structure are strongly
concentrated among semiskilled routine workers in the lower middle class.
I argue that individual employment trajectories and relative shifts in the
social hierarchy are key to better understand recent political disruptions.
A perception of relative economic decline among politically powerful
groups—not their impoverishment—drives support for conservative and,
especially, right-wing populist parties. Individual-level panel data from
three postindustrial democracies and original survey data demonstrate
this relationship. A possible interpretation of the findings is that traditional
welfare policy might be an ineffective remedy against the ascent of right-
wing populism.

